In this lecture, you'll learn about RIP, the Routing Information Protocol.
RIP is a Distance Vector routing protocol.
We spoke earlier about the difference between Distance Vector and the Link State routing
protocols. So you know that it's Distance Vector,
so it's going to be using routing by rumour.
It uses hop count as its metric.
So let's say the Router1 wants to get to the 10.1.0.0 network, and to get there,
it needs to go via R2, R3, and R4. Then, that network would be 3 hops away. A hop is a
router that the traffic has to go through to get to that final destination. The maximum hop count is
15, so there's a bit of a scalability limitation with RIP.
So, it's not really used except in lab or demo environments. It will perform Equal Cost Multi Path (ECMP),
up to 4 equal cost paths
by default. We're currently on RIP version 2 (RIPv2), before that was, obviously, RIP version 1 (RIPv1). RIPv1 is a legacy
protocol which is typically not used at all anymore.
RIPv2 isn't used very often.
RIPv1 really isn't used at all anymore, although, it is still supported on Cisco routers. RIPv1 has
limitations even worse than we have with RIPv2.
It doesn't send subnet mask information with routing updates, so Variable Length Subnet Masks (VSLM) is
not supported.
You don't have to use classful networks with RIPv1. For example, all of your networks could be
a /28, and that would work just fine as long as they are all /28. But you couldn't have some
/24, some /28, and some /30, for example.
They all have to be the same. RIPv2
does support VLSM. RIPv1 updates are sent every 30 seconds as broadcast traffic, so everything
that gets hit by the traffic in that subnet has to process it.
RIPv2 uses multicast address, 224.0.0.9,
so it's more efficient than RIPv1 is. RIPv2 supports authentication,
RIPv1 does not. With authentication, we can put a password on the router on both sides of the link,
so they will not form an adjacency unless we both have the same matching password.
It gives us some better security.
Authentication is supported in all the modern routing protocols,
it's not covered on the CCNA exam though. We also have RIPng, as well as RIPv1 and on RIPv2.
RIPng is RIP next generation, that supports IPv6 networks.
It's not covered on the CCNA exam.
So for the current version of CCNA, you really only need to know RIPv2. To configure RIP, pretty
simple, at global config we say 'router rip' and then, optionally, we're going to say 'version 2'. We do
want it to be running the latest version, and then to specify the interfaces that you want RIP to be running
on and to be advertised,
we use the 'network' command. So in this example, we've said 'network 10.0.0.0'. All interfaces
that begin with 10 will start sending out RIP hello messages and try to form an adjacency.
When they do form a ppeering relationship with the router on the other side of the link, they will advertise
all of the 10.X.X.X networks to that router. The network command should reference a classful network, and no
subnet mask is specified. For example, if on the router, we had an interface with IP address
10.1.1.1/24,
we don't say 'network 10.1.1.0', we say 'network 10.0.0.0'. RIP will automatically
summarize routes to the classful boundary by default.
For example, if you've got an interface with IP address 192.168.10.1/30, and
under RIP, you include that with a network statement,
it will be advertised as 192.168.10.0/24. Because any address that begins with
is a Class C address, which has got a default mask of /24.
So in our example, rather than advertising it as a /30,
it will summarize it to a /24.
If we had an interface with IP address 172.16.10.1/30, that will be advertised
as 172.16.0.0/16, because that's a Class B address and it would default to a
/16.
That is almost never desirable. Unless by some magical coincidence your network, the summarization
does fall exactly in the classful boundaries, in which case, it would be fine.
Your network, modern real networks, aren't designed that they all fall into the summarization ranges
exactly on classical boundaries. So, if you leave auto-summary turned on, it's liable to cause havoc on
your network, possibly blackholing, dropping some of your traffic.
So, we always disable auto-summary. To do that, the commands is 'router rip' and then 'no auto-summary'. So we don't
want to do the automatic summarization, but we probably still will want to do summarization manually.
To do that,
the command is 'ip summary-address'. So, we would do this to get control of exactly how we are summarizing.
When we do this,
the individual summarized routes that fall within the larger range are not going to be advertised, only the summary
route.
So in the neighbor router that learns the route, it's not going to learn all those different individual route.
It will only learn the summary route. It's more efficient and it takes up less memory. It also compartmentalizes
the different parts of your network.
So if you have an outage anywhere, it's going to limit the impact that that has network wide.
So to configure this, while looking at our example here, on router R2, you see that all of the 10.1.X.X
networks are over to the left, out interface FastEthernet1/0. All of the 10.0.X.X networks are
over to the right, out interface FastEthernet0/0 on router R2. So, what we're going to do in the
example is R2 is going to advertise all of the 10.0.X.X networks to R3 as a single summary
route.
So rather than advertising 10.0.0.0/24, and 10.0.1.0/24, and
10.0.2.0/24.
It's just going to advertise 10.0.0.0/16. So R3 is only going to learn
that one summary route,
rather than the three individual /24 routes. So we configure this at the interface level, and you
configure it on the interface that you're sending the summary route
out of.
So all of the 10.0.X.X networks are available out interface FastEthernet0/0, but we're going
to advertise that to R3, out interface FastEthernet1/0. So we configure this on interface fastEthernet1/0,
the interface we're sending the summary route out of. And then to configure the summary, we
say 'ip summary-address rip
10.0.0.0',
and then the subnet mask, 255.255.0.0. So it will just send that one route of
10.0.0.0/16 to router R3.
To be honest though, RIP is only used in really small networks, or for labs, or for demos.
So your network is probably not going to be that big, that you're going to care too much about summarization anyway.
To verify RIP, to verify any routing protocol that we've got running on a router, we can say
'show ip protocols'. So we've done that in the example here, and we can see that the routing protocol was RIP. RIP is
running.
I can also see the interfaces that RIP is running on. So it's running on FastEthernet0/0, FastEthernet1/0,
FastEthernet2/0, and FastEthernet3/0, and I must have just put this command and not long
after configuring it, because it's only sent and received two updates on those interfaces.
I can see it will do equal cost load balancing up to 4 maximum paths. It's routing for the 10.0.0.0
network, and it's got neighbors' routing information sources at 10.0.0.2, and 10.0.3.2.
The distance is the Administrative Distance (AD), which defaults to 120 for RIP.
If I wanted to see my RIP configuration, I can do a 'show run', and then pipe '|', and then 'section rip', rather
than doing a 'show run' and having to scroll through the whole config to the RIP section,
This will show me just the RIP command,
so it's quite convenient.
And once I've configured RIP, I'm going to want to check that I do have RIP routes in routing table.
So my standard command for that is 'show IP route'. In the example here, I can see that I've got 4 routes
that were learned via RIP.
I can see that they are in the column in left, it says 'R', means they were learned by RIP. And I can
see that the Administrative Distance is 120, and then I've got a slash '/', after that
is the metric, that is how many hop counts that destination network is away, the next hop address
when I received the last update, and the outgoing interface. And finally, I can also check the RIP database.
What this is useful for is if you've configured RIP and then you can see that you've got RIP neighbors,
but you look in the routing table and you're not seeing the expected routes in there.
Well, maybe, the routes weren't even received at all.
So the way that you can check that is with the 'show ip rip database', or maybe the routes were received but
they're not the best route. So to check if the routes were received at all by RIP, whether or not they made
it in routing table or not,
we can do a 'show ip rip database'. Next thing to cover
here is default route injection.
This is where we have got a default static route for all traffic probably going out to the Internet, and
we don't want to have to configure a default static route on every single router.
So what we'll do is on the final outbound router, which is connected out to the Internet,
we will configure a default
static route there, and we will then advertise, it inject it into RIP,
so all of our other internal routers will learn about it automatically. Saves us having to do a static route
for it on every single router in the organization.
So in the example here, it's R4 that is connected to the Internet.
So on R4, I say 'ip route
0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0',
so it's a default static route, with the next hop address of 203.0.113.2.
I then want to inject that into RIP, so I say 'router rip' and 'default-information originate'. So that
default static route will be injected into RIP, and it will be advertised to R3 and R5, from R4, and
then they will advertise it on further inbound into my other internal RIP routers. If I now do a
'show ip route', so this is on R1.
If I go back to the topology diagram, you see that R1 is all the way over on the right.
It will have learned this because I configured it on R4. And on R1, I do have a RIP route for
0.0.0.0/0, so that's a default static route. The Administrative Distance is 120 because it is RIP. The hop count is 2,
and I can see that my next hop address is to 10.0.3.2, out interface
FastEthernet3/0.
Okay, that was everything I needed to tell you about
RIP here.
I'll see you in the next lecture for a lab demo of a basic RIP configuration.